# Data Modeling with Postgres

_Data Engineering project with real and simulated data_

### The Goals:

Demonstrating Data Modeling skills with Postgres and building ETL Pipelines, the below mentioned goals are achieved.

1. Define fact and dimension tables for a star schema
2. Write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL

### Project Background:

An Imaginary startup called as Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. 
The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 
Their data resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

Being a Data Engineer, I should create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. 
My role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.

### Datasets:

Two separate datasets song_data and log_data are used in this project.

**1. song_data :**

This is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/) . Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

This is the example of single song file in this dataset,

>{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

**2. log_data :**

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in song_data above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

### Data Tables:

ETL Pipeline is created to extract and load the data in the fact and dimension tables

1. Fact Table:

One fact table called as songplays is created by extracting below mentioned data from other song_data and log_data datasets

columns: [songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent]


2. Dimension Tables:

Four dimension tables are created with the columns as shown below and loaded with the data .

1. songs: [song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration]
2. users: [user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level]
3. artists: [artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude]
4. time: [start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday]

### Files and Usage:

1. sql_queries.py : It contains all the sql queries.

2. create_tables.py : To drop and create the fact and dimension tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

3. test.ipynb : To display the first few rows of each table to let us check the database.

4. etl.ipynb : To read and process a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into data tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

5. etl.py : To read and process files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. This can be filled out based on the work in the ETL notebook.

### Implementation:

Run these files in given order

1. create_tables.py
2. etl.py
3. test.ipynb

### Sample Results:

Sample output for each table can be checked [Here](https://github.com/17rsuraj/data-engineer/tree/master/Data%20Modeling%20with%20Postgres/Images)

------------------------------------------------------

#### License

[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)


