# Data Warehouse

_Data Engineering project with real and simulated data_

### The Goals:

Implementing data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift, below mentioned goals are achieved.
1. Creating Amazon Redshift Cluster, and clients for IAM, EC2, S3
2. Define fact and dimension tables for a star schema
3. Load data from Amazon S3 to staging tables on Redshift
4. Extract the data from staging tables, transform and load into fact and dimension tables. Writing ETL pipeline for it.
5. Check whether all above steps worked correctly by executing sample SQL queries

### Project Background:

An Imaginary startup called as Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. 
The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 
Their data resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

Being a Data Engineer, I should build ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

### Datasets:

Two separate datasets song_data and log_data are used in this project.

**1. song_data :**

This is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/) . Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

This is the example of single song file in this dataset,

>{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

**2. log_data :**

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [Event Simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in song_data above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

### Data Tables:

ETL Pipeline is created to extract and load the data in the fact and dimension tables

1. Fact Table:

One fact table called as songplays is created by extracting below mentioned data from other song_data and log_data datasets

columns: [songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent]


2. Dimension Tables:

Four dimension tables are created with the columns as shown below and loaded with the data .

1. songs: [song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration]
2. users: [user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level]
3. artists: [artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude]
4. time: [start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday]

### Files and Usage:

Create these files in the given order

1. dwh.cfg : Configuration file where user need to add the Cluster credentials. (Never share your cluster credentials with anyone)

2. sql_queries.py : It contains all the sql queries.

3. create_tables.py : To drop and create the fact and dimension tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

4. etl.py : To read and process files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. This can be filled out based on the work in the ETL notebook.

5. Test_Analytics.ipynb : Sample queries to fetch the data inserted into different tables from Redshift staging tables.

-----------------------------------------------------

### Implementation:

Create below things either by Click-in or Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) method. I created everything by Click-in method from AWS Management Console

1. [Redshift Cluster](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/tutorial-loading-data-launch-cluster.html)
2. [IAM Role](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/iam-roles-for-amazon-ec2.html)

Run these files in given order

1. create_tables.py
2. etl.py
3. Test_Analytics.ipynb

### Sample Results:

Sample output for each table can be checked [Here](https://github.com/17rsuraj/data-engineer)

------------------------------------------------------

#### License

[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
